#6090 Document accessibility considerations (#6272)
wagtail/wagtail: docs/advanced_topics/accessibility_considerations.rst

Wagtail generally puts developers in control of content modeling and front-end markup, but there are a few areas to be aware of nonetheless, and ways to help authors be aware of readability best practices.

* :ref:`Content modeling <content_modeling>`
* :ref:`Accessibility in templates <accessibility_in_templates>`
* :ref:`Authoring accessible content <authoring_accessible_content>`

----

.. _content_modeling:

Content modeling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As part of defining your site’s models, here are areas to pay special attention to:

Alt text for images
-------------------

The default behavior for Wagtail images is to use the ``title`` field as the alt text (`#4945 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/4945>`_).
This is inappropriate, as it’s not communicated in the CMS interface, and the image upload form uses the image’s filename as the title by default.

Ideally, always add an optional “alt text” field wherever an image is used, alongside the image field:

- For normal fields, add an alt text field to your image’s panel.
- For StreamField, add an extra field to your image block.

> - For rich text – Wagtail already makes it possible to customize alt text for rich text images. Unfortunately it’s not currently possible to elect not to provide alt text for decorative images (see `#6494 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/6494>`_).

Reviewer: "it’s not currently possible to opt out of providing alt text" removes the double negative from the sentence.

or 

"it’s not currently possible to set alt text as an optional field in these situations"

When defining the alt text fields, make sure they are optional so editors can choose to not write any alt text for decorative images. Take the time to provide ``help_text`` with appropriate guidance.
For example, linking to `established resources on alt text <https://axesslab.com/alt-texts/>`_.

> .. note:: Why not have an alt text field on the Image model?

Reviewer: Is this note presenting the case why one shouldnt add an optional "alt text" field or is it a note to explain why Wagtail's image model doesnt have one out of the box?

Author: More the former, but good point, I should reword this so it’s as clear as possible.

Bold and italic formatting in rich text
---------------------------------------

By default, Wagtail stores its bold formatting as a ``b`` tag, and italic as ``i`` (`#4665 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/4665>`_). While those tags don’t necessarily always have correct semantics (``strong`` and ``em`` are more ubiquitous), there isn’t much consequence for screen reader users, as by default screen readers do not announce content differently based on emphasis.

If this is a concern to you, you can change which tags are used when saving content with :ref:`rich text format converters <rich_text_format_converters>`. In the future, :ref:`rich text rewrite handlers <rich_text_rewrite_handlers>` should also support this being done without altering the storage format (`#4223 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/4223>`_).

TableBlock
----------

The :doc:`/reference/contrib/table_block` default implementation makes it too easy for end users to miss they need either row or column headers (`#5989 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/5989>`_). Make sure to always have either row headers or column headers set.

> Also treat its Caption field as mandatory, so screen reader users navigating the site’s tables know where they are.

Author: I’ll rewrite this slightly because I think I could’ve used more plain language to start with.

Here are common gotchas to be aware of to make the site’s templates as accessible as possible,

Alt text in templates
---------------------

See the :ref:`content modelling <content_modeling>` section above. Additionally, make sure to :ref:`customise images’ alt text <image_tag_alt>`, either setting it to the relevant field, or to an empty string for decorative images, or images where the alt text would be a repeat of other content.
Even when your images have alt text coming directly from the image model, you still need to decide whether there should be alt text for the particular context the image is used in. For example, avoid alt text in listings where the alt text just repeats the listing items’ title.

Empty heading tags
------------------

In both rich text and custom StreamField blocks, it’s sometimes easy for editors to create a heading block but not add any content to it. If this is a problem for your site,

- Add validation rules to those fields, making sure the page can’t be saved with the empty headings.
- Consider adding similar validation rules for rich text fields.

Additionally, you can hide empty heading blocks with CSS:

.. code-block:: css

>     h1:empty, h2:empty, h3:empty, h4:empty, h5:empty, h6:empty {

Author: Good question – this has been discussed before in #4431, and I don’t know what to recommend. I don’t think there are accessibility concerns with empty paragraphs. I need to check for list items.

>     h1:empty, h2:empty, h3:empty, h4:empty, h5:empty, h6:empty {

Reviewer 2: Is this a candidate to be handled by the CMS? If empty headings and empty paragraphs are bad. Why are they not filtered out? Of raise a validation error on save? Why would we promote hacks?

>     h1:empty, h2:empty, h3:empty, h4:empty, h5:empty, h6:empty {

Author: Empty paragraphs aren’t bad for accessibility so let’s leave this to #4431. Empty headings are bad, so I’m going to add documentation on how to make sure StreamField heading blocks are required. For rich text, I have opened #6526.

I think promoting the CSS trick is appropriate in this case, because I assume it’s an issue that affects most / all Wagtail sites right now, and there simply is no other ready-to-go solution to it.

        display: none;
    }

In the future, :ref:`rich text rewrite handlers <rich_text_rewrite_handlers>` should also support this being done server-side (`#4223 <https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/4223>`_).

Forms
-----

When using the ``wagtailforms`` :ref:`form_builder`, don’t stop at Django’s default forms rendering:

- Avoid ``as_table`` and ``as_ul``, which make forms harder to navigate for screen reader users.
- Take the time to customize the default form rendering so required fields are clearly labeled as such, so fields use the correct autocomplete and autofill attributes, etc.
- Follow `official W3C guidance on accessible forms development <https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/forms/>`_.

----

.. _authoring_accessible_content:

Authoring accessible content
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Here are things you can do to help content authors take accessibility into consideration.

Author: Thank you, I like it, will change to `create` rather than `compose`.

```suggestion
Here are things you can do to help authors create accessible content.
```

wagtail-accessibility
---------------------

`wagtail-accessibility <https://github.com/neon-jungle/wagtail-accessibility>`_ is a third-party package which adds `tota11y <https://khan.github.io/tota11y/>`_ to Wagtail previews.
This makes it easy for authors to run basic accessibility checks – validating the page’s heading outline, or link text.

help_text and HelpPanel
-----------------------

Occasional Wagtail users may not be aware of your site’s content guidelines, or best practices of writing for the web. Use fields’ ``help_text`` and ``HelpPanel`` (see :doc:`/reference/pages/panels`).

Readability
-----------

> Readability is fundamental to content being accessible. One of the ways to improve content is to have a clear target for reading level / reading age, which can be assessed with `wagtail-readinglevel <https://github.com/vixdigital/wagtail-readinglevel>`_ as a score displayed in rich text fields.

Reviewer 2: Should we use `texts` with an `s`?

> Readability is fundamental to content being accessible. One of the ways to improve content is to have a clear target for reading level / reading age, which can be assessed with `wagtail-readinglevel <https://github.com/vixdigital/wagtail-readinglevel>`_ as a score displayed in rich text fields.

Author: I will rephrase a bit but keep "readability" because this isn’t exactly the same as plain language.

Accessibility considerations
============================

Accessibility for CMS-driven websites is a matter of :ref:`modeling content appropriately <content_modeling>`, :ref:`creating accessible templates <accessibility_in_templates>`, and :ref:`authoring content <authoring_accessible_content>` with readability and accessibility guidelines in mind.

> Wagtail generally puts developers in control of content modeling and front-end markup, but there are a few areas to be aware of nonetheless, and ways to help authors be aware of readability best practices.

Reviewer 2: Maybe reword/extend this introduction and make clear this page is about what Wagtail can do to make content accessible. Other topics (contrast, font-size, valid markup) are important but not discussed.
